It was late in the afternoon in May 2008 on a rare sunny day in Vancouver, British Columbia. Incoming lululemon CEO Christine Day looked out at the Coast Mountain range from her office and, despite the blue skies, sensed a mammoth storm brewing.

Day, who spent 20 years climbing the leadership ranks at Starbucks, joined lululemon as SVP of Retail in January 2008. It was a time of meteoric growth and expansion for lululemon, founded in 1998 as a specialty retailer that designs, manufactures, and sells “yoga-inspired athletic apparel.” In 2005, lululemon was a privately held $40 million entrepreneurial startup with less than 20 stores in Canada. As Day prepared to step into the CEO role in mid 2008, lululemon was a publicly traded $350 million company with close to 100 stores, including 56 in the United States, and nearly 3000 employees.

The directive from the board was to continue the company’s growth trajectory by opening more stores and, ultimately, increasing sales to $1 billion. The company was also poised to launch an eCommerce operation.

VIDEO: "Build a billion dollar company." (1:57)
Among the challenges that Day would inherit were underperforming stores. According to Day, mismanagement of the real estate strategy had resulted in high-cost locations in many of the new U.S. markets with little to no demand. Moreover, poorly supervised construction at many sites caused escalating costs and quality concerns.

Lululemon was struggling to implement new inventory systems to keep pace with the demands of its expanding marketplace. Day also observed that cross-functional barriers had eroded the sense of teamwork within the organization, resulting in an inability to achieve compromise. “The whole organization slowed down,” said Day, “because people weren’t aligned.”

EXHIBIT 1
Lululemon's Next Workout
Can Christine Day broaden the yoga clothier's appeal?
by Aili McConnon
Lots of chief executives talk about keeping an ear to the ground. Few do it. Even fewer do it literally. But on a recent
Sunday in Vancouver, B.C., Christine Day, the incoming CEO of yoga apparel retailer Lululemon Athletica, was on her
hands and knees in a fitting room hemming pants. That's standard operating procedure at Lululemon. Every worker,
from the C-suite to the accountants to the design team, must spend at least eight hours a month working in stores—
an unusual mandate for a retailer. It's a way to keep close to the company's carefully cultivated and well-heeled
clientele: the burgeoning Yoga Class.
Serving that niche with a laser-like focus has paid off for the Vancouver retailer. In 2007, sales rose 85%, to $275
million; profits leapt 300%, to $31 million; and the company raised $344 million in an initial public offering. Lululemon
fans shell out $92 for a pair of workout pants, compared with $60 at Nike (NKE) or $70 at Under Armour (UA),
according to research firm ThinkEquity Partners. No wonder, then, that at most of its 86 warehouse-chic stores,
Lululemon sells $1,710 worth of gear per square foot—about triple the rate of red-hot retailers Abercrombie & Fitch
(AWF) and J. Crew (JCG). "It's the best growth story in retail today," says Paul Lejuez, a senior analyst at Credit
Suisse (CS).
As Day takes over—her official start is June 4—Lululemon is at a precarious point. It plans to increase its U.S. store
count from 38 to 69 this year, with a goal of 300 over the next few years. But inventory problems have crimped
margins, since the company had to pay extra to ship out-of-stock items to stores by air. Amid worries over cashstrapped U.S. consumers, the stock price, which rocketed to 60 after going public at 18, has fallen back to 31. How
Day manages the rapid growth will determine whether Lululemon fades away, like so many once-hip retailers, or
becomes a lasting franchise.
Day most recently ran Asia-Pacific operations at Starbucks, which serves as both a growth template and a cautionary
tale for Lululemon. "At Starbucks, we moved too quickly away from the authentic Italian espresso," she says. CEO
Howard Schultz hired her in 1986 as his assistant. She took care of everything from bookkeeping to human resources
and quickly moved up the management ranks. In his memoir, Schultz credits Day for her early insight that the coffee
chain's stores should be designed as "sisters—each with an individual appearance, but clearly from the same family."
In her most recent post, as head of Asia, Day oversaw a side of Starbucks' business that is still growing furiously even
as U.S. stores slump.
Lululemon has been quietly growing since 1998, when it was founded by Dennis "Chip" Wilson, a Canadian
entrepreneur who had previously founded a surf, skate, and snowboard company. After attending a yoga class, he
found the cotton-polyester blends most people wore to the studio were uncomfortable and ill-fitting, and they collected
sweat. He created a black exercise pant for women made of fabric that would wick away perspiration and fit well, too.
In 2000, Wilson, still the company's design chief, opened a small design and retail space in Vancouver that doubled as
a yoga studio. He created clothing during the day and tweaked it based on feedback from students who took yoga
classes in the same space at night.
Page 2 of 2
classes in the same space at night.
Linking with local gurus has been crucial. Before Lululemon opens a store in a new city, it approaches yogis or other
fitness class teachers. In exchange for a year's worth of clothing, they become Lululemon "ambassadors," wearing the
duds in front of students and giving the company design feedback. They also host students at private sales and free
classes sponsored by Lululemon in unmarked lofts or condo spaces.
Now the pressure's on Day to expand Lululemon beyond yoga into sports such as running, swimming, and biking.
Outgoing CEO Robert Meers, who previously led Reebok International, put together a management team of retail vets
from the likes of Nike, The Limited (LTD), and Abercrombie (RL). Day, though, has been visiting stores and picking up
tips from workers on the line. At regular breakfast meetings, she's fond of asking employees: "What's the most idiotic
thing we did in the last 60 days?"
SIDESWIPED BY SEAWEED
Early on, Lululemon dodged a bullet. In November, The New York Times reported the company made false claims
about a line of clothing infused with seaweed that purported to moisturize skin during exercise. Lululemon says thirdparty tests confirmed its garments contained a seaweed derivative, but it removed the claims from labels.
A more pressing challenge is inventory. Analysts say stores in coastal areas often run short of small sizes and those in
the Midwest sell out of larger sizes. Day says the company has rolled out a new inventory-management system and
will spend up to $1 million on a direct-sales Web site. Day is quite aware that, in a recession that's punishing other
retailers, she'll have a brief window in which to fix the glitches. "You can't be complacent about blaming the economy,"
she says, "when it's probably some operating...issue you're trying to get right."

VALUE PROPOSITION
Lululemon describes its vision as "Elevating the world from mediocrity to greatness." The company has developed a unique approach to selling athletic apparel, downplaying its role as retailer and defining its mission as creating “components for people to live longer, healthier, more fun lives.” In fact, company officials say that the job of store employees is actually not to sell clothes.

VIDEO: "The garment will sell itself." (5:34)
The company designs its technical garments and accessories around the needs of athletes, based on the feedback it gathers from a variety of sources.

VIDEO: "They take pride in their feedback loops." (3:51)
Lululemon stresses the “F” factor in its sportswear—emphasizing “fit” and “function,” but steering clear of the term “fashion.” While best known for women’s yoga apparel, lululemon creates technical wear for other sports such as running, tennis, golf, and general fitness. The company also offers an ever-expanding line of men’s clothes.

VIDEO: "Function is fashion." (2:41)
Lululemon’s value proposition, its view of its customer, and its vertical retail model set it apart in an industry sector largely dominated by wholesalers.

VIDEO: "There are two levels of competition." (2:13)

4. Culture
Fun

When I die, I want to die like my
grandmother who died peacefully
in her sleep. Not screaming like
all the passengers in her car.

— lululemon core value

Core Values and Manifesto
While the company's core values stress entrepreneurship and the importance of making a quality product, they also encompass issues like integrity, work/life balance, and even the importance of having fun.

Exhibit 5
Lululemon Core Values
VIDEO: "A daily hit of athletic-induced endorphins..." (4:44)
Exhibit 6
Lululemon Manifesto
Training and Goal Setting
In 2008, lululemon invested $3.76 million in training employees. New hires at lululemon participate in training programs ranging from 40 hours to a full month. While skills-based training is an essential part of the program, the emphasis falls on teaching personal accountability, helping employees set goals, and inculcating them in the company culture.

VIDEO: "Stand in nothing." (3:39)
When employees reach one year of service, lululemon sponsors their attendance at a three-day session offered by Landmark Education, a personal training and development company connected to Werner Erhard, who founded the est phenomenon in the 1970’s. After three years of service, employees are given the opportunity to attend an advanced Landmark program.

VIDEO: "People bring themselves to work." (1:15)
5. One Store, One Hundred Times
Entrepreneurship

We treat and pay employees
as though they run their
own business.

— lululemon core value

From its early days opening stores in Canada, lululemon created a sequence for seeding new markets. The formula was a way to connect the company’s real estate strategy to its brand, building market demand by focusing on that which influences its core customers.

VIDEO: "The cool, hip, urban neighborhood" (1:47)
The lululemon head office is called the Store Support Center (SSC), reflecting a company wide emphasis on stores as the place where customers touch the brand. Lululemon tolerates and even encourages brand extension at the store level. Individual managers are empowered to customize their stores to reflect their local communities. CEO Christine Days explains, "No matter what strategies are created at the head office, the people who execute the strategic plan are the front lines."

VIDEO: "You hire local people and become Soho" (5:03)
Exhibit 7
Store Manager Compensation
By encouraging local decision making and brand extension, lululemon has found it must tolerate a certain amount of risk.

VIDEO: "It gets messy sometimes" (2:04)
6. Growing Pains
Integrity

We do what we say we will
do when we say we will do it.
If we cannot keep our
promise, we immediately
contact all parties and set
new by-when dates.

— lululemon core value

As Christine Day and the lululemon leadership team looked to the future, they were mindful of the past and the lessons learned during their first major expansion.

Perhaps the most significant growing pains involved the cultural shift that came with the hiring of Former Reebok Chairman Bob Meers as CEO in 2005, who in turn brought in several outsiders to form his upper management team.

VIDEO: "It's not the model lululemon was built on" (7:03)
As lululemon scaled up, persistent problems with inventory suggested that the company’s growth was outpacing the development of infrastructure and operational systems.

VIDEO: "Merchandise would blow out of a store in three days." (1:26)
Perhaps the biggest legacy of the rapid expansion into the U.S was misguided real estate decisions that continued to drain resources more than two years later.

VIDEO: "We really got a bunch of bad locations." (2:16)
Exhibit 8
Lululemon Retail Store Data
In January 2008, former Starbucks executive Christine Day was hired as SVP of retail and was quietly identified as Bob Meers’ heir apparent.

VIDEO: "It's cool for us to have her as a role model." (3:25)
The lululemon organizational chart was restructured in significant ways during the leadership transition that began with the appointment of Bob Meers in 2005 and continued through Christine Day’s promotion in June 2008.

Exhibit 9
Leadership Transition
7. Final Thoughts
Balance

There is no separation between
health, family and work. You
love every minute of your life.

— lululemon core value

When Christine Day took over as CEO in June 2008, her mandate was to continue lululemon’s growth trajectory and ultimately build a billion dollar company. At the same time, however, Day couldn’t shake her sense of impending doom. “The swells were building, and I realized we were on pretty shaky ground,” she reflected.

In a macro environment characterized by decreasing consumer confidence and growing uncertainties in global markets, Day faced a number of complex challenges. Even as lululemon continued to open stores, sales per square foot dropped from $1,710 in FY07 to $1,451 in FY08, while increases in comp store sales dropped from 24% to 3%. Lululemon was plagued by persistent inventory problems and real estate issues in the United States. Moreover, the company’s leadership team was demoralized and fragmented.

In determining her initial steps as CEO, Day ultimately had to decide what actions to take (and not take) to better execute lululemon’s strategy, as well as how to engage both her senior team and the larger organization.

VIDEO: "I knew I had to react quickly." (2:40)