The Morrison Company
“Let’s meet tomorrow for breakfast to discuss your sense of what’s gone wrong and how we can
fix it.” CEO Jason Robbins’s request echoed in Shauna Breen’s mind as she sat down at her desk to
gather her thoughts. It was the end of her first day as The Morrison Company’s new Director of
Operations. Morrison developed and manufactured radio frequency identification (RFID) tags
known as smart labels for the retail and pharmaceutical industries. The company’s sales had boomed
over the past year, and production levels had increased dramatically to meet monthly and quarterly
shipping targets. However, an end-of-year push exacerbated manufacturing problems that had
plagued management throughout the previous nine months. Fourth-quarter performance from RFID
products aimed at retailers was lower than expected. Fortunately, stellar earnings from its
pharmaceutical RFID line buoyed Morrison’s financial results for the year overall (Exhibit 1).
Breen was an experienced operations manager hired for her successful track record of engineering
dramatic turnarounds at several small manufacturing firms. She had begun the day with separate
meetings with her direct reports followed by a thorough tour of the plant. While she had sought a
new opportunity that would challenge her, what she heard and saw indicated that the company’s
operations performance was even worse than she had anticipated. “This is a heck of a way to start the
New Year!” she told herself as she fired up her laptop to prepare for the next morning’s meeting with
Robbins.
Company Background
President and CEO Jason Robbins started The Morrison Company—named after his maternal
grandfather—in 2003 just outside of Denver and was its sole owner. A serial entrepreneur, Robbins
4 5 6 4
M A Y 1 6 , 2 0 1 1For use only in the course Operations at Richard Ivey School of Business from Jan 02, 2023 to Apr 30, 2023.
Use outside these parameters is a copyright violation.
4564 | The Morrison Company
2 BRIEFCASES | HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL
had sold his two previous businesses to private equity firms, and he expected to do the same one day
with this venture.
Robbins thought of the idea for The Morrison Company while attending his 20th business school
reunion. He had listened to a presentation on emerging supply chain management trends including
the use of RFID technology to track pallets and cases of goods after they left the shipping dock en
route to downstream supply chain positions. After conducting extensive market research, Robbins
assembled a team of highly experienced engineers to develop an initial line of products. He decided
to target pharmaceutical firms since, according to its strategic industry scan, some had already begun
to consider implementing smart tags. Coincidentally, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
was preparing to issue the first guidelines for RFID pilot studies involving drugs, so the time was
ripe for entering the market. The company began producing smart tags for pharmaceutical use in the
summer of 2004. During the second half of 2007, Morrison expanded its product line to attract
retailers.
RFID Technology & Smart Tags Market
Technology
RFID technology combined transponders (i.e., tags), with varying capabilities to store, transmit, and
receive data wirelessly, with devices known as readers, which received and transmitted the data via
the reader’s antenna (Exhibit 2). Readers could be handheld and mobile or fixed and stationary. RFID
tags enabled automatic identification, monitoring, and authentication of the objects to which they
were attached. Data generated by RFID systems could be transferred to an information system for
processing, analysis, and storage. Moreover, data stored on certain types of RFID tags could be
changed, updated, and even erased. Unlike barcodes that required direct contact with a scanner,
RFID tags did not need even a direct line of sight to the reader, only some level of proximity between
the tag and the reader. High frequency (HF) passive RFID tags had a range of up to roughly one yard,
while lower-priced ultra-high frequency (UHF) tags had much longer read distances.
Each RFID tag consisted of an inlay embedded in various materials so that it could be fabricated
into adhesive labels or more durable adhesive tags. Inlays consisted of a clear plastic film to which an
integrated circuit (i.e., IC or “microchip”) and an antenna were affixed. RFID tag producers included
firms that manufactured ICs, inlays, finished tags, and those that provide some or all of these
capabilities. The inlay market was highly fragmented, and many small suppliers provided
supplemental manufacturing capacity to larger ones.
Smart Tags Market
The total global market for RFID hardware, including smart tags, reached approximately $4.9
billion in 2010. Forecasts predicted that figure would increase at an 11.5% compound annual growth
rate (CAGR) to $8.5 billion by 2015. The most typical use or most frequent application of RFID tags
was in such areas as supply chain management, security access and control, asset tracking, and
contactless payment (e.g., EZ-Pass for highway tolls). Firms in highly regulated industries such as
defense and pharmaceuticals were among the early adopters of RFID technology.
Retail applications such as supply chain and inventory management accounted for approximately
6%–7% of global RFID revenues in 2010, and analysts believed that would rise to 10% within five
years. RFID tags offered retailers a way to track merchandise for stocking purposes, since they could
provide near real time data on where products were in the distribution chain. Item-level taggingFor use only in the course Operations at Richard Ivey School of Business from Jan 02, 2023 to Apr 30, 2023.
Use outside these parameters is a copyright violation.
The Morrison Company | 4564
HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL | BRIEFCASES 3
provided retailers with improved inventory visibility, accuracy, loss prevention, and operational
efficiency—including reduced stock outs. Apparel retailers were among the leaders in adopting
smart labels; an estimated 300 million labels were sold for that application in 2010.
RFID smart tags were sold at prices that ranged from roughly $.09 to $.18 each in 2010, and prices
had remained relatively flat compared to the previous year. Pricing was based on order volume,
amount of memory on the IC, and the type of material used to package the inlay. Wal-Mart, which by
2006 had required its 200 largest suppliers to use UHF tags at the case-pack and pallet-level, was the
prime driver behind efforts to lower RFID tag costs to $.05 or less apiece. The resulting size
reductions, design changes, and other technological developments were leading to shorter product
life cycles as new types of tags supplanted existing ones. This was especially true of UHF ICs, whose
technology was much less mature than that of the older HF models.
Product Lines: Retail & Pharmaceutical
The Morrison Company specialized in producing RFID finished tags, also known as smart labels.
The company competed against approximately 150 other manufacturers in the highly fragmented
smart tags market. The company’s biggest competitors included Avery Dennison—one of the world’s
largest manufacturers of self-adhesive technologies and applications—and Cenveo, the third-largest
graphics communication company in North America. As competition to meet growing demand
heated up, Morrison tried to add value by emphasizing responsiveness and speed. Breen learned that
her predecessor had drafted a proposal to offer on-time delivery guarantees or reduced lead times for
orders above a certain size, but had never presented the plan to Robbins.
As of January 2011, The Morrison Company manufactured four varieties of smart tags. It offered
basic and premium versions of both paper and synthetic labels; premium products offered special
coatings that improved performance and used materials that offered greater resistance to scratching
or smearing. For each variety, units were produced with three different types of adhesives
(permanent, removable, and tamper-evident), in three standard shapes (round, rectangular, and
square), and 18 sizes. Each inlay’s IC and antenna were specific to the smart tags’ intended
application as well as the customer’s technology preference (e.g., HF vs. UHF). Morrison currently
offered a choice of 6 different ICs and 10 antennae.
Pharmaceutical Line
Morrison’s original product line consisted of standard smart tags available in just two sizes and
shapes. Its tags were specifically designed to meet the rigorous standards required by the DEA (the
U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency) and some state regulators (notably California). The company
worked with a major pharmaceutical company to identify detailed specifications and to develop and
pilot test the initial set of products. In 2007, Morrison patented a manufacturing process that
produced inlays whose performance was unmatched for accuracy, especially at the individual unit-
level. Within three years, Morrison had acquired a 30% share of the pharmaceutical smart tag market.
Global sales of RFID hardware to the pharmaceutical industry were projected to increase at a
CAGR of 34% from 2010 to 2015. Morrison’s marketing department projected similar growth of that
magnitude for the company. RFID tags were becoming particularly important to drug makers for
several reasons. In addition to the operational efficiencies gained by greater inventory visibility,
pharmaceutical companies adopted smart tags to increase patient safety by fighting the proliferation
of counterfeit drugs, reducing the risk of tampering, and tracking expiration dates.For use only in the course Operations at Richard Ivey School of Business from Jan 02, 2023 to Apr 30, 2023.
Use outside these parameters is a copyright violation.
4564 | The Morrison Company
4 BRIEFCASES | HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL
Drug companies valued smart tag performance and reliability over price. More than 85% of
Morrison’s pharmaceutical product sales contained HF chips, which were favored for their smaller
size and better performance despite being almost double the cost of UHF tags with comparable
features. The average price per unit was $.22. The only customization Morrison offered in this
segment was optional label printing. In 2010 pharmaceutical sales of approximately $36.2 million
represented two-thirds of Morrison’s annual revenue. Net earnings before taxes for the product line
were $6 million.
Retail Line
The Morrison Company produced a second line of products for retailers. It faced considerably
greater competition than did the pharmaceutical products, and price in this newly developing market
was a primary factor in purchase decisions. Although initially offering only a small range of standard
tags, by the end of the first year the company began to differentiate its smart labels through
customization. It offered a choice of colors, finishes, and cut-to-order sizes and would even meet
other specifications for especially large orders. With the acquisition of new technology in early 2009,
Morrison began offering a new option known as “personalization” that consisted of custom printing
on finished labels. Almost 85% of the retail units sold had some type of customization. The average
price per unit was $.11.
As the cost of RFID tags dropped, item-level tagging in retail grew in popularity. As of 2010, more
than 100 of the largest retailers required apparel manufacturers to tag each unit. Industry analyst ABI
Research predicted a CAGR of 12.1% by 2015 in demand for UHF tags, largely driven by a huge
increase in retail apparel tagging. In addition to large chain stores, a growing number of Morrison’s
retail customers were smaller, independent multi-unit retailers that sold apparel, footwear, home
furnishings, or liquor. In 2010, the retail line accounted for one-third of the company’s total revenue.
However, higher than expected production costs resulted in net income before taxes of $376
thousand—well below its target for the year.
The company expected far fewer direct competitors for its retail line in the near future. It had
recently purchased exclusive rights to a patented device that combined the inventory control
capability of RFID with the theft deterrence functionality of retailers’ existing security systems. The
planned new line of products with this technology had begun to attract the interest of the largest
retail chains, some of whom had placed initial small orders for pilot programs. In a recent profile in
RFID Journal, the leading industry publication, CEO Robbins declared “Our new retail products will
make The Morrison Company a dominant player in that market just as we are today in
pharmaceuticals.”
The Manufacturing Process
The Morrison Company based all its manufacturing-related activities in a single 28,000-square-
foot facility. It had moved there from a nearby space just prior to launching its retail product line.
Located in a large industrial park in Aurora, Colorado, the building also housed the company’s
engineering, marketing, and general administration departments. The possibilities for expansion in
that location were limited: Morrison leased the building, and the surrounding lots had already been
developed.
The manufacturing process, which involved 60 hourly production employees, included the
following six activities: (1) receiving, inspection, and inventory, (2) parts picking, (3) inlay fabrication
and testing, (4) tag assembly and testing, (5) personalization [optional], (6) packaging.For use only in the course Operations at Richard Ivey School of Business from Jan 02, 2023 to Apr 30, 2023.
Use outside these parameters is a copyright violation.
The Morrison Company | 4564
HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL | BRIEFCASES 5
Morrison fabricated inlays with two fully automated RFID inlay assembly systems. Inlay
production was rarely the system bottleneck. Setup required a specially trained operator to handle
the ICs. Inlays used a variety of ICs, delicate silicon wafers typically priced at between 2.9 cents and
4 cents each depending on their size and purchase volumes. The placement of the IC and antenna
each required precision. For instance, the tag would be likely to fail if contact between the IC and
antennae were off by as little as one millimeter.
Tag assembly was an automated process that involved mounting the inlay between two pieces of
material known as a backing and a facing. Adhesive was applied to the backing, which when peeled
away from the inlay allowed the label to be affixed to an item. The facing protected the antenna and
IC from damage caused by scratches, heat, moisture, and other environmental factors. The company
used 10 large, sophisticated machines to assemble the rolls of finished labels at a rate of up to 20,000
units per hour. Each required two operators to complete setups and to monitor performance tests.
Four of the tag assembly machines had printing capability that enabled personalization. This step
created an identity for each tag by printing bar codes and other information on the surface of the
label. The machine could also print additional security features such as invisible ink markings. More
than 70% of retail product orders included personalization, compared to fewer than 15% of
pharmaceutical product orders.
Production employees were responsible for quality assurance at each step of the manufacturing
process. Receivers inspected all production supplies upon arrival and followed procedures to replace
any broken or missing parts. The inlay sub-assembly and tag assembly steps included testing to
verify that each product performed to specification. Materials handlers transported carts containing
work-in-process from one activity area to the next and maintained the integrity of the separate
orders. From conversations during her initial factory tour, Breen sensed a strong commitment to
quality among the workers.
Production Planning and Control
Two production and inventory control managers, one purchasing manager, and one quality
assurance manager reported to the Director of Operations, who in turn reported to CEO Jason
Robbins. A Materials Resource Planning (MRP) system and a separate web-based order management
system informed the management team’s decisions and actions. Transactions with vendors took place
electronically, and established customers placed orders online. Robbins had considered investing in
an Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system when launching the company, but determined that the
implementation costs outweighed the benefits. During her initial tour of the production floor, Breen
noted the absence of computer terminals and observed production lists with hand-written changes
posted near each machine.
Marc Siegel, the production manager for the retail line, explained to Breen how he and Al
Robinson, who was responsible for the pharmaceutical line, established monthly production
estimates (Exhibit 3).
We start with the marketing department’s sales forecasts. Based on inventory projections
and our knowledge of what is needed to produce each product, we determine the parts and
labor required to meet the monthly targets. Then we both independently develop production
plans for our respective product groups. Finally, we take into account the demand from known
orders to create the master production schedule based on one eight-hour shift five days per
week.For use only in the course Operations at Richard Ivey School of Business from Jan 02, 2023 to Apr 30, 2023.
Use outside these parameters is a copyright violation.
4564 | The Morrison Company
6 BRIEFCASES | HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL
In response to Breen’s question about inventory policies, Siegel noted that the company aimed to
keep its finished goods inventory as low as possible because of the risk of product obsolescence, the
high cost of inventory, and space limitations within the facility. Breen knew that many of the retail
products were made to order to accommodate customization requests, but a core set of standard
products sold well. The vast majority of pharmaceutical products were built to stock.
Next, purchasing director Amanda Cooper described how her department procured
approximately 240 distinct standard parts and supplies. As the group entered the raw materials
storage area, Cooper pointed out that of these, 165 parts and supplies represented 80% of the total
outlay for purchases. Roughly less than 30% were common to both retail and pharmaceutical
products. Variation in the packaging of different types of pharmaceutical products called for special
materials. For instance, bottles, vials, and syringes required small, rigid disk-shaped tags, while
blister packs and other multiple dose packages needed somewhat larger, flexible tags.
Anticipating Breen’s next question, Cooper noted how, as a matter of policy, the company sought
at least three vendors to supply each component. In early 2011, however, only about 40% of the parts
were available from three or more sources. Another 30% were available from two sources. The
remaining 30%, including six of the most popular ICs, had only one source. The company placed
orders bi-weekly based on a five-month planning cycle with the expectation that goods would arrive
no more than two days before they were needed. Even though this practice built in significant lead
time, vendors were not always able to supply 100% of the orders on time.
Day-to-Day Operations Management
Having heard about the operations planning and inventory management processes, Breen was
eager to learn how her managers made decisions on a day-to-day basis and asked, “What’s a typical
day like on the production floor?” Robinson responded:
It all begins with the master production schedule. At the end of each day, Marc and I get
together to determine the next day’s production. When necessary, we consult with the
marketing department so we can be sure to prioritize pending orders. Then we both assign
workloads for each of the inlay and assembly machines. We divide the inlay sub-assembly
work into equal-sized batches to accommodate machine requirements. In order to minimize
setups, the tag assembly batch sizes depend on order size.
As she listened, Breen began to consider the amount of variability the production system needed
to accommodate. “I would expect that you draw up the schedule for standard products with a high
degree of confidence that no adjustments would be needed,” she said. “But to what extent do the
customized products introduce uncertainty?” Siegel explained:
Some types of customization add no extra processing time because they involve simply
picking selected parts. Certain combinations of non-standard features, however, can increase
our total processing times. That’s because operating times can increase, additional operations
may be necessary, and sometimes we need to adjust a machine to produce at a slower rate to
maintain quality.
As the production managers continued to describe the typical day, Breen heard several things that
troubled her. Workers received their assignment at the start of each shift. Supervisors sometimes
found it difficult to specify a task assignment for a worker, especially if a parts shortage or other
factor disrupted the production schedule. Throughout the day, managers and employees coordinatedFor use only in the course Operations at Richard Ivey School of Business from Jan 02, 2023 to Apr 30, 2023.
Use outside these parameters is a copyright violation.
The Morrison Company | 4564
HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL | BRIEFCASES 7
the production flow throughout the plant to maximize machine utilization and to accommodate
unexpected deviations from the schedule.
As the tour came to an end, Breen asked for information about the operators she had observed
throughout the plant. Hector Gonzalez, the director of quality assurance, explained that production
employees earned an hourly wage that was based on their skill level. The highest pay rate belonged
to the three electrical technicians responsible for maintaining and repairing the plant’s equipment
and machines. Based on factors including attendance record, effort, and attitude, workers could
receive development opportunities that would qualify them to advance to a higher pay rate.
Approximately half of the production team had the skills and training to perform any operation in
the plant.
Trouble on the Production Floor
Reflecting on all she had heard and observed, Breen’s biggest concerns were the seemingly
ineffective production controls and the inefficiencies caused by supply shortages. The latter were
especially a problem with ICs. A lengthy economic recession had kept chip makers from upgrading
their equipment, so they were unprepared when the economy improved and demand for chips
increased. Due to the resulting microchip shortages, Morrison delivered orders as late as 10 weeks
beyond the originally scheduled date.
The incidence of stock outs discovered during parts picking had more than tripled in the past six
months. Many times a stock out meant that some orders could only be partially completed. Such
orders remained as work-in-process inventory on the factory floor, though due to space constraints
some were moved on to the packing area. Work-in-process inventories also built up when inlay sub-
assembly slowed due to mechanical problems or when defects required rework. Similarly,
bottlenecks commonly occurred during personalization, which negatively affected the subsequent
packaging operation.
The company had long prided itself for a return rate consistently at or below 1%. Yet for the first
time in its history, during the previous year Morrison had begun experiencing customer returns in
excess of 3% of shipments. Most of these involved errors in the content of deliveries rather than
malfunctioning tags. Average available machine time per day reached an all-time low, and one of the
production managers voiced concerns about problems with the reliability of one of the tag assembly
machines.
Breen knew that to compete effectively in the face of growing demand, especially for the
pharmaceutical line, the company’s capacity would need to increase. Additional machines were not
an option; there was simply no space for them. Adding a second shift was a possibility, but it would
likely require higher pay to attract skilled electrical technicians to work the less-desirable evening
hours.
In a short time, the Morrison Company had become an important player in the RFID smart tag
marketplace. If recent weeks were any indication, the company was on a downward trajectory unless
it could identify the source of its production difficulties and implement changes that would better
position it to succeed. Returning to her office, Breen began to think about her next steps. She
identified several issues that could be addressed in the short term to reduce costs and improve the
plant’s performance. Beyond these adjustments, she also realized that Morrison’s dire situation might
require more fundamental changes that would necessitate longer-term investments in the company’s
operational capabilities.For use only in the course Operations at Richard Ivey School of Business from Jan 02, 2023 to Apr 30, 2023.